Come on in.
Hello. Good afternoon, minister. Afternoon.
I'm sorry to keep you three minutes late, two minutes late,
but, um, we have been talking about the arms spot. I've
Got one question.
Right. Um, so we've got 15 minutes with you, uh,
minister, and I'm gonna allow you
to start as soon as you're ready.
It's not you. Now, I just want to acknowledge that, uh,
honorable Jenny, uh, Jenny Anderson's got a lead,
so I'm gonna give her the first question,
but it's not a just giving you notice.
Right. Okay. So don't take it as personal. Slight. Okay.
Thank you. Good afternoon everyone.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear
before the committee to discuss the arms Bill.
I'll keep my opening remarks brief.
The best use of this time is your question,
so we can ensure this new law is fair and fit for purpose.
The Arms Act 1983 is now more than 40 years
old over decades.
It's been repeatedly amended, often in response
to events under urgency.
The result is a patchwork law that is difficult
for licensed firearm owners to navigate
and efficient for police to administer,
and not as effective as it should be at targeting criminals.
The arms Bill aims to improve public safety
by keeping firearms out of criminal's hands,
while making compliance easier for licensed firearm owners
through sensible changes that reduce regulatory burdens.
I outlined the key changes in my first reading speech
and other announcements, but I'm happy
to provide further detail in response
to any questions. Thank you.
Okay, first question, honor, will Jenny answer? Thank
You very much. Um,
I was just interested that, um, you've gone out publicly
and asked for people to submit in favor of the bill.
That's kind of typically unusual for a minister to, to,
to say whether people should vote one way
or the sort of, uh, submit one way or the other.
Um, and we have received a really large amount
of, uh, submissions.
Just interested on, on your, um, on your view, on,
on why as a minister responsible you would openly, uh,
invite people to support the legislation?
Well, I'm using the opportunity that I have to be able
to get licensed farm owners to one, understand
that there is a bill there and two, to submit on it.
And of course, I'm going to ask 'em
to support it because I wrote it.
So, um, I I, I think it would be dumb for me to go out there
and say, if you don't support it, please come and submit.
There are other, uh, social media accounts run
by other people and agencies that will do their own thing.
And I'm doing mine. I am the Minister in charge of firearms,
so I'm using the framework that I can
Yeah, I'll, I'll, and as, as a former minister, um,
and working alongside other, um, others, it, it,
it has never been the practice in the past for someone
who has oversight for legislation to be, uh,
encouraging, uh, submissions, either yes or no.
They would typically sit in the middle
and say, that's democracy.
That's people putting their vote forward. Mm-hmm.
But to be, I mean, I guess are you concerned
with any perception of bias by as the minister responsible,
uh, uh, putting weight on the side of those
who support the legislation?
Uh, no. If we had 250,000 submissions, um,
then you might say that I might have had an influence,
but I don't think so.
I think actually what I've done is created a piece
of legislation that has a lot of changes in it,
and I'm asking people to have a look at it
and if they like it, say that they like it.
There's been a lot of apathy out there by firearm owners,
and I've heard since I've done the bill,
people say to me, thank you.
You've fixed it. Not realizing
that this is actually just one stage
of making good legislation.
The implementation of it next term is going
to be the real deal breaker here on whether we've
got it right or not.
So having people
or encouraging licensed firearm owners,
that small niche community to look at the bill
and then to write to you and say what you like
or don't like about it, will actually improve the bill,
improve public safety and improve compliance. Okay.
I'm gonna move on now. Um, any other questions?
Uh, I'll go to, um, Ms. Nui Walters.
Uh, thank you Mr. Chair
and thank you minister for being
with us to answer some questions.
Yes, good question. Um, my question is really
around the nature of the regulatory powers and the bill.
Um, so in many ways, to me they look quite broad ranging,
which is quite unusual.
So I'm thinking about the powers of exemption, the powers
of transition, and the powers to essentially define
or redefine, um,
things which would ordinarily be in the interpretation
section of a bill.
Um, and I understand that it may be
that the committee sees the draft versions of regulations
that are developed, um,
but my, my true concern is the nature
of the powers themselves
because of course, um, the minister,
the executive could alter those at any stage.
And I do think that, um, we are seeing a creep in terms
of a shift away from Parliament to the executive in terms
of some of these and key issues like definitions.
Okay. So just, just wondering if you are open to considering
a drawdown of some of those, um, those issues. Mm-hmm.
And I understand, uh, the members' concern there.
I think what you'll find as you start to go
through submissions and read them is you'll,
you'll hear the technicality around firearms.
It's very hard, uh,
to put one particular type into legislation when it can be
modified, protect, uh, potentially into something else.
So being able to do the details
and regulations of how the bill will work in itself, I think
that's where we need a lot of that detail to actually sit,
because we need to be able to modernize
and change as we can when we need to
and be able to do it quickly if possible as well.
Uh, labor did it themselves in 2019
and 2020 put through a whole lot of orders
and council that changed regulations.
And what I've looked at in this bill is
what could we pull out of regulations
and put into law that the things
that we know cannot be changed easily?
And where is the ability that we can give the regulator
to be able to think outside the square, uh, when it comes
to the administration of the regulations for the arms act,
when they get to that point, one
of the main concerns I've had is trying
to put everybody into a square box.
We can't fit everyone into a square box,
and the moment somebody is outside of that square box,
they become outside of compliance.
So allowing a bit of room for the regulator, uh, to be able
to look at the individual, I think is very important.
It's what we did in 1983.
Labor didn't change it in 2019 or 2020,
and I've just done a little tweak here and there
and actually pulled some stuff out
and put it into the arms act instead of leaving it in regs.
Okay. I'm going to go to Mr. Carl Bates. Thanks chair.
Uh, and thanks minister for your work on this.
One of the areas I'm interested in is the visitor visa. Yes.
Um, and the extension of that from three to 12 months.
Now, one of the understandings I have around that is
that it's to allow people to come, uh,
for shooting competitions, um, or competing rather, uh,
and for hunting experiences, if someone was to come
to an annual experience
or an annual competition, um, 12 months seems
as though it wouldn't capture two visits.
Mm. And so I was interested in your thinking
around the 12 months as opposed to 18 months as an example,
that would, um, mean practically for people
that only come on an annual basis, it would cover, uh,
more than one trip to New Zealand.
Yes, and I agree with your observations there.
Uh, by increasing it to 12 months, it was
to capture the hunters that come over, uh, do, uh,
multiple hunts within a year.
Um, and of course I was hoping that the, uh, shooting
sports, shooting fraternity, uh, would come
and, uh, submit on the fact
that it doesn't capture them if they do those annual events.
Uh, I and would ask the committee to actually think about
that as you consider the bill, that some
of those will be left out
and would have to go through that process again.
And perhaps a 14 month to 18 month extension on
that would be appropriate.
I would certainly invite it.
Thank you. I'm going to Mr. Scott Willis.
Thank you. Um, so minister, this is
doing away with Firearm Safety authority,
but establishing a new, a new specialist, um,
firearms regulated still within the police.
I guess one of the things we heard was a big push to say
that, you know, police aren't trusted to do, do this.
Uh, we're still doing something within the police.
It seems like a strange way
to go about it when firearm Safety Authority
has been effective, has done a really good job,
and we've heard from police how useful it is to ensure, um,
not only compliance,
but enforcement, how, how
that relationship is very, very effective.
Do you think you're breaking that, those forms
of communication by taking this out
and into a new organizational form that's, that's going
to be within the police but specialist unit
and a bit hard, harder to say?
I think the, Without addressing the public concern?
Yeah, I think the me before is question and,
and it's a very good one.
And the answer to that, no, I don't think
that I'm breaking anything.
Uh, by keeping the firearm Safety Authority
or the regular, regular regulator under New Zealand Police,
they're actually hosted by New Zealand police.
They, uh, will eventually, um,
well not eventually they will become their own reg regulator
entity, but they will be managed by the, um, ministry
of Justice, uh, headed under their own chief executive, uh,
who is looked at by the, uh, secretary of Justice,
who is currently Mr.
K White New Zealand police still have a role.
And this is where, for example,
the RED Flag system is really important, uh,
that the communication is very strong.
And I believe that the way
that we've gone about this creates a couple of things.
One, it's efficiency.
Two, it keeps New Zealand police as the enforcer
and the regulator still together,
but without the enforcer having any controls on the
administration or the regulation of the, uh, ACT itself, uh,
it allows them to be able to still communicate,
protecting our frontline police officers, uh, as well
as keeping communities safe.
But by separating the two, we are leaving police to do
what they do so well, which is the enforcement
of the Arms Act and moving them away from work
that is not their core business, which is the administration
and regulation of that ARMS act, ensuring
that the regulator can actually fully go about their
business, enhancing the compliance and enhancing trust
and confidence with them.
Right. Good question. I'm going to go,
go to Mr. Todd Simpson. Ah,
Couple of quick questions from me, minister, just one.
And, and obviously, um,
Ms. Wallace talked about the regulations.
Just to, just to confirm to the extent possible,
this committee's gonna get to see draft regulations
alongside our consideration
of the legislation. Is that your
Intention? Yes, that is
my intent.
I do not plan to hold anything back
or hide anything, uh, from the committee at all.
I want to have a robust law, a firearms law
that is regarded once again as being the best in the world
because that's what we were regarded as right up until 2019.
And the only way we can do that is for everybody
to be a part of the solution.
I have a lot of experience with firearms, firearm safety,
uh, firearm sports.
I have a lot of disciplines, but I don't know everything.
And the moment I'm arrogant enough to say
that I have nailed this first pop will be the time
that we don't have good law.
This is why I think it's so important, the work that you do
as a committee and listening to the submitters, the people
who are the licensed firearm owners,
as well as those who are not.
Okay, honorable. I just one quick follow up on that.
Um, thank you and, and you, as you outlined
before, this is obviously the next step.
You've brought it Bill, but there was actually a lot
of work done prior to this.
Can you just briefly outline how we got to this point?
'cause Correct, just so people understand
'cause it's not just streaming this up.
Thank you. Um,
well I think this is actually quite important
because the Arms Act, oh, sorry.
The arms bill, that's currently before Parliament is drafted
after extensive consultation
with the firearms community and with others.
It came about by listening
and by, um, making sure that we make changes
that will create efficiency, uh,
that will support the licensed firearm owners to be able
to comply and su support the enforcers
and the administrators as well of that arms act.
So this actually came about, not from everything in my head,
but that came from the community who engaged
through consultation. Okay.
Thank you. Honorable Dr. Duncan. Thanks.
Thanks for, um, coming minister.
Um, and a lot of the, what we see here is um, you know,
seemed really sensible, so it's great.
One of the things that's cropped up already in some stuff
we've seen is the power of exemption,
a relatively broad power of exemption, um, in, um,
regulation making powers.
And you've said, uh, you would like, uh,
sports tutors to have an ability to get an exemption.
I just, what is, I guess there's two, there's a narrow part
and a white part to my question.
What would you see that broad exemption power
to be used for?
That's the general part
and the narrow part is, what do you mean
by sports shooters getting an exemption?
Thank you for the question
and for, um, asking me to clarify what that means.
'cause I think this is actually very important.
A lot of people hear about semi-automatics and sports
or just hear the word semi-automatics
and they get quite alarmed by it.
What I was asking for is an exemption for sporting shooters
to be able to use semi-automatics
with large capacity magazines in a very
controlled environment.
And that's not something that they've ever had before.
Under the last regime, they were just able
to get these firearms
and if they wanted to use it in sport, recreation
or hunting, they could do so.
We've now stopped that under the last piece of legislation.
I'm asking for an exemption for these people
to work along the same lines as the pistol restrictions.
That means those particular firearms can only be used on
an approved range.
They must do a certain amount
of competitions per year in order
to retain their endorsement just like pistol do.
What sort of competitions use those particular firearms?
So three gun competitions are the main ones
that use them in New Zealand.
Um, and of course this runs with the pistol regime.
So three Gun is pistol, shotgun, and rifle.
Uh, they'll use large capacity magazines.
And the difference with this is instead of just saying
that someone has to belong to a club,
they have to have an endorsement.
The endorsement means that they have
to be checked on every 12 months.
They have to do a certain amount of work within the club,
a certain amount of competitions,
and if they don't just like pistol,
they will have their endorsement removed.
So there's a constant scrutiny on those people. People
Wouldn't an, wouldn't an exemption like
that essentially be legislating
to allow semi-automatics to be used for competition? Yeah.
Yes. Right. That's exactly what an exemption would do
and that's what I have been advocating for on behalf
of the fit and proper law abiding sports shooters out there
who have done nothing wrong. Mm-hmm. Thank
You. Can I just ask
one question more of a clarification?
Um, in the previous regime, uh, if someone went to a doctor,
he was a, he say in a case, um, with, uh,
suffering from mental health or wanted to go
and get, um, support at a difficult time,
there was a requirement for
that notification go through to the police.
Can I just ask, as a matter of clarification,
what has happened to that?
Is that still in play
or has that been removed through some of your other changes?
No, that is still in play.
So when a person applies for a license
or they renew their license, they must give the, uh,
the information of their GP to the regulator.
The regulator will then write a letter to the GP
and say, please let us know if there's anything
that we should be concerned about with this person in regard
to their mental capacity, their health, their fit
and proper status, their state of mind.
That meant a number
of people were really worried about going to their doctor
if they had potential mental health problems.
And this arose mainly
after COVID as well, where a lot of people,
whether licensed firearm owners
or not, were seeking help
for the Australian stress that they were under.
Well, there were a group of people who decided not to go
and get help because they were worried
that they would lose their license.
The change that I'm making is for the regulator to be able
to say, well, hey, you know what?
We've heard from your doctor
or we've even heard from you
that you're not feeling too good at the moment.
We are going to suspend your license.
Now what they've had in the past is suspension only
for three months and then it's revocation.
We are basically saying allow a person the chance
to get some help and they may not be able to get
that help within three months.
We all know that our mental health, um,
capacity within New Zealand is already stretched
and trying to get it within three months can
be, um, troublesome.
So what this means is we can allow them to suspend a license
for up to 12 months.
Um, while a person seeks help,
this does not mean they retain their firearms.
If a person is suspended, their firearms are taken away.
What it does mean is that they're not automatically revoked.
Now, revocation can occur if the person does something, uh,
or they actually display signs that are not fitting proper,
that that revocation,
that suspension can turn into a revocation,
but it's actually allowing the time
for a person to seek help.
Good. Now minister, we're a little bit over time, so um,
I'm gonna just say thank you very much.
Um, you are the opening, um, session of a long process
for this committee, but we're looking forward to dealing
with the ARMS Act and thank you for coming to start.
Thank you. If I may just have a closing remark.
The ARMS Act needs to be changed.
I appreciate how all
of the political parties had supported
it through its first reading.
I'm hoping that together we can get it into a state
where we have public safety as number one
licensed firearm owners able to comply with the law
and we get less red tapes so that we get efficiencies in
what we are doing while maintaining that public safety.
We've done our bit on our side.
The submitters have done theirs.
It's now up to you as the committee
and I ask that you hear from all submitters
with an open mind. Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you very much Mr. Right.
Um, I'm gonna ask if I can to vacate the room.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you officials. Thank you.